blog: add StrykerJS 5 article (#276)
stryker-mutator/stryker-mutator.github.io: blog/2021-05-15-announcing-stryker-5-brave-new-dimension.md

---
slug: announcing-stryker-js-5-brave-new-dimension.md
title: Announcing StrykerJS 5.0 - Brave new Dimension
author: Nico Jansen
author_title: Stryker Team
author_url: https://github.com/nicojs
author_image_url: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/1828233?s=400&u=fec18ad3776aaafec54c49bbd7173a841ae7ea59&v=4
tags: [stryker]
---

# Announcing StrykerJS 5.0 - Brave new Dimension

We're proud to announce the next major release of StrykerJS: 5.0. With a name change, a new dimension in your report, a new way to discover files, updated mutators, quality of life improvements, and minor bug fixes.

If you're new to mutation testing, it's a way to measure your tests' effectiveness. A mutation testing framework will make small changes, called _mutants_, one by one in your source code. Then it will run your tests to see if one of them fails. If so, you just "killed" that mutant; if not, it "survived". If too many mutants survive, you probably want to improve your tests. The mutation testing report will give you insides into the test cases you may have missed. If this all sounds complicated, please take a look at [our RoboBar 🤖🍷 example](https://stryker-mutator.io/example).

> If you're already using Stryker, you can install this latest version with your package manager of choice.

Reviewer: Why do I need to install if I'm already using Stryker? Wouldn't I need to update instead?

And shouldn't it be StrykerJS 😬

Author: I guess 🙄

😉

Author: I'll change it to `npm i -D @stryker-mutator/core@latest`

Or using the `clear-text` reporter:

![](/images/blogs/test-view-console.png)

The test view tells you at a glance which tests are _killing_ mutants, which are merely _covering_ mutants (without killing) and which are _not covering_ any mutants. Furthermore, you can determine which mutants were covered or killed by that particular test case. Finding out so much information about your tests has never been this easy!

A couple of caveats to point out:

- The `Covering` state will only be available when selecting the [`perTest` coverage analysis setting](https://stryker-mutator.io/docs/stryker-js/configuration#coverageanalysis-string).
- StrykerJS always runs your tests with `bail` mode active (or `failFast` in jasmine), making your test runner stop after the first failing test. As a result, a mutant can only be killed by one test. If you have overlap in asserts across tests, other tests might be marked as "Covering", while they would kill a mutant when run in isolation.
- Some mutants are executed as soon as your file _is loaded_ instead of during _test execution_. For example:
  ```diff
  -export const hello ='👋'
  +export const hello = ''
  ```

>   Tests are never able to cover such mutants (yet they can still kill them).

Reviewer: This confused me. A test never covers a mutant but can still kill it? What is this magic

Author: How would you describe it?

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean by it never covering such mutants but still being able to kill them, so I don't know how I'd describe it 😅. Are you talking about static mutants?

- Currently, only the `@stryker-mutator/jest-runner` can group your tests in their original test files. Running StrykerJS with another test runner will result in your tests being displayed in one list instead.

## 🤷‍♂️ Discovering files

StrykerJS typically doesn't mutate your files directly. Instead, it creates a copy inside a _sandbox_ directory, usually located at `.stryker-tmp/sandbox-123456`. However, it won't copy over all files there to save time. Stryker used to rely on git to decide which files to copy. Any `.gitignored` files would not be copied.

> There were some issues with this approach. First of all, it required your project to be located in a git repository and you needed to have git installed. And then, there are also examples of test suites that need some `.gitignored` files to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There were some issues with this approach. First of all, it required your project to be located in a git repository and you needed to have git installed. And then, there are also examples of test suites that need some `.gitignore`d files to run.
```

With this change, specifying `files` is now deprecated. You can probably remove `files` if you're currently using it, or you can configure `ignorePatterns` instead.

See the [original pull request](https://github.com/stryker-mutator/stryker-js/pull/2848) for more information.

## 👽 Updated mutator

We've decided to add a new variant to the [logical operator mutator](https://stryker-mutator.io/docs/mutation-testing-elements/supported-mutators#logical-operator). It now also mutates _the nullish coalescing operator_ (`??`).

```diff
-foo ?? bar
+foo && bar
```

To kill this mutant, you will need to write a test for both branches of the operator. Like you already needed to do for the logical OR (`||`) and logical AND (`&&`) operators.

We're also in the process of adding a new [optional chaining mutator](https://github.com/stryker-mutator/stryker-js/pull/2886), but that didn't make it in time for this release.

## 🕵️‍♂️ Default coverage analysis

> Coverage analysis is a feature that makes StrykerJS run faster because it will run fewer tests per mutant. If you are to enable this feature depends on your test suite and test runner, see [coverage analysis in configuration](https://stryker-mutator.io/docs/stryker-js/configuration#coverageanalysis-string) for more details.

Reviewer: The flow of this paragraph is a bit weird, I'm not quite sure what you mean

- **node:** Node 10 is no longer supported. Please use Node 12 or higher.
- **serialize:** Having a non-JSON-serializable value in your configuration won't be sent to the child process anymore. If you really need them in your test runner configuration, you should isolate those values and put them in test runner-specific config files, loaded by the test runner plugin itself, for example, jest.config.js, karma.conf.js, webpack.config.js.
- **ignore patterns:** Stryker will no longer use a git command to determine which files belong to your project. Instead, it will rely on sane defaults. You can change this behavior by defining [`ignorePatterns`](https://stryker-mutator.io/docs/stryker-js/configuration/#ignorepatterns-string).
- **ignore patterns:** The `files` configuration option is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Please use [`ignorePatterns`](https://stryker-mutator.io/docs/stryker-js/configuration/#ignorepatterns-string) instead.

  This:

  ```json
  {
    "files": ["foo.js"]
  }
  ```

  Is equivalent to:

  ```json
  {

>     "ignorePatterns": ["**", "!foo.js"]

Reviewer: Should this be higher with the change explanation to show people how to migrate their config easier?
